So, hey, my name's Philip Iliascu.
I'm the graphics and media evangelist,
and this first talk is about OpenGL 3.0
and some of the advances that we've
made you can take advantage of.
So, yeah, as John was saying, you know,
we recently introduced the iPhone 5S and
the iPad Air and the iPad Retina Mini,
and these are our first devices
ever with support for OpenGL ES 3.0.
So, yeah, we're going to talk about some
of the advances that we've made.
But OpenGL ES 3.0 is only
available on these devices,
just to start out with.
This is a major leap forward,
and there's a lot of new
advances that you guys really
want to take advantage of.
So we'll talk about some of that stuff.
But specifically, you know, for graphics,
you should realize that,
recognize that the A7 is, like,
our new baseline, our, you know, like,
our next-gen GPU.
So, moving forward.
This is going to be really important
for you all to take advantage of.
We recommend this is kind of
like what you start driving
your development towards.
And, you know,
still keeping in mind that there are,
you know, you want to keep the A6
in mind and these things.
But, you know,
you can start thinking for new features.
This is a good direction to head towards.
You know,
we meet with game developers a lot, and,
you know, a lot of times they say, oh,
we're not ready to, you know,
start working with the new stuff yet.
You know, there's a... You know,
people are still on the older
GPUs and this sort of thing.
And, you know, but, you know,
like we said earlier, you know,
we have 74% adoption of iOS 7.
So that's huge.
There's a huge,
huge demand for the new A7 devices.
So it's a major leap forward.
I highly recommend moving in
this direction if you can.
And then, of course,
combining that with OpenGL ES 3.0,
this has its feature set taken
directly from desktop OpenGL.
It enables things that were
previously only seen in
AAA games on the console before.
So it's great.
And, you know,
the third part of this picture,
which maybe you hadn't thought
of or seen too much of yet,
is how we're pairing this up with
the OpenGL ES debugger in Xcode.
And there's some really amazing,
awesome advances in there for
the A7 that I'm going to show you
today that we didn't actually get
a chance to show at WWDC because,
well, there wasn't an A7
device yet at that time.
And this is great.
This is actually,
I had a chance to actually work
on a lot of this stuff myself
before becoming the evangelist.
So I'm very excited to
actually get to show you this.
Yeah, I'm excited to share some of
that stuff with you guys today.
The agenda for this hour.
First, I'm going to, you know,
I want to start with some of
the highlights of the A7 GPU.
And then we're going to talk
about what you can do to,
you know,
move your ES 2 games towards ES 3.0.
And then I'll take a deeper
dive into some of the new
features of OpenGL ES 3.0.
And then, of course,
I'll show you how you can
tune your ES 2 and ES 3 games
using Xcode's OpenGL ES 5.0.
And then, of course,
I'll show you how you can
tune your ES 2 and ES 3 games
using Xcode's OpenGL ES 5.0.
Xcode's OpenGL S5 debugger on an A7 GPU.
Great.
So I'm going to go ahead
and start with the A7.
You know,
and just some of the facts first.
You know, the A7 is still a tile-based
deferred renderer,
much like the previous GPU, the A6.
But the performance is up
to that of double of the A6.
So that's fantastic.
So A7 is the first GPU that provides
fully native support for OpenGL ES 3.0,
but it still provides support
for ES 2.0 and ES 1.1 through,
you know, backwards compatibility.
We implement the shaders for you
if you're going to use ES 1.1.
But we don't recommend taking
that route if you can avoid it,
unless you really want to support older,
older devices or your game
is doing that already.
So... Okay.
And, of course,
it's a shader-based pipeline,
just like all modern GPUs.
So...
Here's a list of some of the
new features in OpenGL ES 3.0.
There's a lot of them.
Uniform buffer object,
instance rendering,
multiple render targets.
There's a new version of the
OpenGL ES shading language,
GLSL.
Frame buffer fetch.
And how we're combining that with MRT so
you can do things like deferred shading.
That's actually one of the
things I'll talk about later.
There's a lot to look at,
but as much of this as you can sort
of wrap your mind around will give
you a lot of really great tools
to make really cool games with.
All right.
So quickly,
I want to just kind of mention
the new limits on an A7 GPU.
And there's a lot of
stuff on the screen here,
but I think the big takeaway is
that the limits are now double
of that of the previous GPU.
More than double in a lot of cases.
And of course,
you can have multiple render
targets now on the A7.
Max color attachments of four,
whereas before you could just have one.
So of course, if you are still using an
OpenGL ES 2 context on the A7,
not an OpenGL ES 3 context,
then you'll be capped
at the previous limits,
the OpenGL ES 2 limits.
So this is one reason to take
advantage of OpenGL ES 3 right away,
is to get the hardware
native limits on the A7 GPU.
I'll talk about a few of the key
differences between the A6 and the A7.
And the first, performance.
In the area of performance,
there is no longer a penalty
like we had on the A6.
I mean, not as much of a penalty
for dependent texture reads.
But there is a higher penalty now for
logical frame buffer loads and stores.
So what I mean by that,
I don't know if you all
know what that means,
but in case you don't,
logical buffer load would be if you
forget to clear your color attachment
at the beginning of the frame.
Well, if you do that,
we actually have to reload that.
And so you'll incur a
performance penalty for that.
That's a logical buffer load.
So the way to not do that is to make
sure you clear your color attachment.
And a logical buffer store is if you
forget to say invalidate or discard
your depth or stencil or multi-sample
attachments at the end of the frame.
In this case, you know,
we will actually make a copy of
those attachments between frames.
And so you'll incur a cost
performance cost for that.
So that's something to keep in mind.
So precision.
So in the realm of precision,
we've promoted low P shader values
are now promoted up to 16 bit.
And any floating point
shader calculations are done
with a scalar processor.
So this might have some
implications in your game.
And, you know,
like if you're doing in your shaders,
if you're doing anything with
write masks or anything like that,
you know, you might want to take a
look at some of that stuff.
And make sure it still works the way
you expect it to work on the new GPU.
And as far as limits goes,
like I said before, you know,
apps within ES2 context will
still get the ES2 limits.
But apps within ES3 context
will get the native limits.
Another reason to move
forward with the ES3.
All right,
so I'm just going to quickly talk about
how you might move to ES 3 from ES 2.0.
The big picture is that the core of
ES 3.0 is actually a superset of ES 2.0.
So what that means is that if
you just want to take your ES 2.0
code and move it into ES 3.0,
it will mostly just work,
although the stuff that was
in core is still in core,
of course.
For extensions,
any extensions you were using in ES 2.0,
there's a couple of different changes.
Three cases, actually.
The first case, some have actually moved
into the ES 3.0 core as is.
There's a couple really simple things you
can do there to just get those to work,
and you can pretty much do
that with a search and replace,
and we'll talk about that in a second.
Some have actually moved into ES 3.0
core with some semantic changes.
So a little bit of API changes,
but not anything dramatic.
And some are still... Some that were
extensions are still extensions.
Not too much to do as far as that goes.
All right, so looking at the first case,
these pretty much work identically
between ES 2.0 and ES 3.0.
The only difference is that we've dropped
the EXT or OES prefixes or suffixes
from the functions and the tokens.
So a lot of this stuff you can just do
search and replace and move it forward.
And a couple of quick examples, you know,
GL text storage 2D Xt has a
token GL RGB 8.8 with OES has
now become GL text storage 2D.
And that's it.
And another example,
map buffer range Xt just drops the Xt.
And, you know, same with all the tokens.
So that's great.
You know, that's like the trivial case.
Case number two, a little less trivial,
but still not, you know,
rocket science or anything.
You know,
these extensions have some API changes,
map buffer, discard frame buffer,
texture flow, they all still exist, but,
you know, there might be some code
changes you may have to make
to get them to work in ES 3.0.
So a couple examples.
MapBuffer,
this is the extension that lets you map
an area of some memory in the GPU onto
the CPU so you can read and write.
Well, MapBuffer OES is gone.
Now you would use MapBuffer range,
and just specify the max size
of the buffer to get the same
functionality as MapBuffer OES.
And discard frame buffer.
We've renamed the function.
That's all there is to it.
It's now GLInvalidateFrameBuffer.
And now this is the function
that you would use to avoid
a logical store penalty.
Just want to make this point.
You know, use this to invalidate anything
you're not going to present to the
screen at the end of your frame.
And this will help increase the
performance of your games on the A7.
And Apple FrameBufferMultisample.
GLResolveMultisampleFrameBufferApple
has now become,
well, you create a source and a
destination buffer and use blit.
Joe Blip frame buffer.
And that's great,
because you can actually specify
regions and so on and so forth.
Pretty simple.
All right, so case number three.
These extensions are actually
still extensions in ES 3.0,
but some of them may have
a couple minor changes,
but nothing dramatic.
And copy texture levels, RGB 422,
the debug label, debug marker API that
you can use with Xcode,
actually.
I don't know if you know about it,
but you can use it with Xcode to create
groups and label stuff so that when
you're running the OpenGL debugger,
you'll actually see your draws grouped.
By in folders and stuff like that.
That's the extension you use that with.
And then I've highlighted X shader
frame buffer fetch for two reasons.
One, there are some minor
semantic changes here,
mostly in the GLSL version,
and I'm going to also
talk about it later.
That's the other reason.
So...
[ Transcript missing ]
Now, you don't even need to move
the ES 3.0 to get this.
But in ES 3.0, it's part of core,
whereas in ES 2.0, it was an extension.
So this is something you can
take advantage of now and speed
up the performance of your games
if this makes sense for you.
What's instancing all about?
Well, it's the case where you might
want to draw many similar objects.
You know,
in this scene here that I'm showing,
we're drawing 18,000 asteroids.
Right?
18,000 asteroids.
Each asteroid has 48 vertices.
So if you do the math,
that's 864,000 vertices, I believe.
That we're actually -- 864,000
times we're going to run the,
you know,
vertex shader and so on and so forth.
So -- and all the keys
are in the same place.
So you can do that.
You can do the calculations
you might be doing.
With instancing,
you can actually do that,
get rid of all of the work that you're
doing on the CPU -- not all of it,
but, you know,
a big majority of the work you might
have been doing on the CPU previously.
And still have different positions
and different colors and,
you know, all sorts of -- you know,
whatever.
Each asteroid can have
its own parameters.
And that's what makes it really powerful.
So, you know, without instancing,
here's one way you might do this.
You know,
you go ahead and draw the backdrop,
draw the stars and the planets.
And then you would, you know,
brute force loop through
all 18,000 asteroids and set
some kind of uniform matrix,
you know, like your model view projection
or whatever for each asteroid
and that sort of thing.
And then actually draw the asteroid.
Now, when you do this, what do you do?
You draw the asteroid.
And what this does is it fills up
the OpenGL command buffer with,
what, 18,000 times two calls here.
And of course,
most people are probably doing a lot
more than just setting one uniform.
So, you know,
you're just filling up this command
buffer and asking -- which essentially
is asking GL to do a bunch of work.
That's just asking the GPU to do work.
The CPU is asking the GPU to do work.
This is where instance
rendering comes in.
Instance rendering lets you
draw the same object many,
many times from a single draw call.
That's what's really powerful about it.
You know, and in that draw, you know,
every single one of these
can have its own position,
its own rotation,
its own texture coordinates, you know,
different all sorts of stuff,
whatever you need.
There are two APIs,
two ways to take advantage
of instance rendering.
The first one, instance arrays.
This is kind of similar to
how you would set up your
attribute arrays for positions,
normals.
You might actually, you know,
create another attribute.
Or you can use one of the other ones you
have and set it up in the stride somehow.
But the simplest way to think about it
is you have another attribute array.
And then you'd specify a divisor
so that you could actually get
at the per instance data for each
instance as you're running through.
You know, if you want to see this
in a little more detail,
the WWDC talk from this year
on OpenGL ES 3.0 goes into
this in a lot more detail,
or advances in OpenGL goes
into this in a lot more detail.
And shader instance ID,
I'll talk about in a little more
detail because it's the simpler,
I think, conceptually of the two.
But, you know, real basically,
it basically gives you this GL instance
ID built in in your shader that
increments for each instance that
you can use to do anything you need.
Now, as I said,
both of these are available
on all iOS 7 devices.
ES 3 is the core and
ES 2 is an extension.
So I highly recommend you guys
start using this now if you can.
All right.
So taking a little bit
closer look at instance ID,
you know, you get this built-in
GL instance ID in your shader,
which is incremented for each instance.
So for the first asteroid,
the first 48 vertices,
you will have instance ID 0.
And then the next 48 vertices,
instance ID 1.
And so on and so forth.
And what you do with it is up to you.
So in our particular scene,
we were using it to, you know,
do some kind of sine and cosine
calculation to put it in the orb,
to put each asteroid
in the orbit somewhere.
And a number of other things,
which I'll talk about
in a little more detail.
But you can use it to, you know,
maybe look up into a uniform
buffer object with the uniform
buffer object extension.
You can also use it with the new
vertex texture sampling extension,
which this is great because
with this extension,
you can do interesting things in
your vertex shader with a texture
like bump map each instance,
for example.
You can now do bump mapping
directly there because you
can look up into a texture.
And you can use the uniform
instance ID to do that.
All right.
So here's what the, you know,
basic setup on the CPU would look like.
You would just, you know,
set up your vertex attrib arrays.
And then, of course, you know,
depending on if you're using
the divisor version or not,
you might have another one.
But either way,
you would then create your uniforms,
your global uniforms that will
be used across all instances.
And all in one draw call,
specify how many asteroids
you want to draw.
raw.
That's it.
A lot less CPU work.
And in your shader, you know,
you might have the same setup.
You can choose version 300 or not.
In this case,
I'm using version 300 and setting
up my uniforms and my attributes
the way you normally would.
And using instance ID to calculate
the position of each asteroid.
This is kind of a simple canned example.
We're just kind of
setting them up in a grid.
It's not actually what
we're doing in the demo,
but, you know,
just to illustrate the point,
instance ID can be used however you want.
In this case, you know,
I'm modding it by 100 and
dividing it by 100 to get some XY.
And then I'm outputting that position.
You can have much more complex lighting
or whatever it is you do in your shader,
but, you know,
that's the basic example of
how you'd use instance ID.
All right,
so I'm going to actually run a quick demo
and show you guys how you might use this.
Okay,
so here's the demo I was showing earlier.
And here we are rendering, you know,
18,000 asteroids in immediate mode,
the brute force method
I showed you earlier.
We're getting some kind of performance,
you know, 18 frames per second.
Okay, that's, you know.
So, you know, if I tap the screen,
we switch to instance ID.
And we're getting, you know,
about double.
That's actually really fantastic.
I mean, it's actually faster if I don't
have it hooked up to this projector.
But, You know, either way,
that's double the performance
that we were seeing before.
represents one instance.
So that saves-- instead of 864,000
model view projection matrix
calculations and a vertex shader,
we do it 18,000 times once per instance.
So that's better.
And it's in a previous rendering pass
before we do any rendering at all.
Next topic, I wanted to talk about
multiple render targets.
The main idea behind
multiple render targets is,
well, now you can render to four
attachments or four textures at once.
This might look like the first pass
of a deferred shading algorithm
where you have your G buffer,
your geometry buffers, your normals,
your depth, your albedo.
And it is, actually.
We actually started playing
around with some of this stuff.
And what's great is that you can now
have-- for each one of these attachments,
can have a different format as well.
So your color can be ARGB 8888.
You might want higher
precisions for your normals,
1010102.
And you can mix all these in one pass.
So the one thing I wanted to
mention about this before we get
too far into it is that if you
want to stay on the fast path,
you don't want to output
more than 128 bits per pixel.
So if you have a color
attachment that's ARGB 8888,
that's 32 bits that you're outputting
in just that one attachment.
And if you have four
with the same format,
that's going to be 128.
So whatever format you use,
try and do the calculation and
figure out how many bits per
pixel you're actually outputting.
And that will keep your
app on the fast path.
If you go over that,
you'll incur a pretty
huge performance penalty.
I'm not going to get too deep
into deferred shading here,
because this is something
that's been around for a long
time on desktops and consoles.
And there's a lot of information
out there about how you
might do deferred shading.
But just briefly want to mention,
this is something you might
use to decouple the amount
of-- like the geometry,
the overall geometry from the
number of lights in your scene.
So the complexity of your geometry from
the number of lights in your scene.
This lets you have a lot of
really interesting lighting,
lots of lights.
And you can see that there's lots
of lights in your scene irrelevant
of what the geometry looks like.
So multiple render targets, however,
is just this one piece.
So this would be the first pass
of a deferred shading algorithm.
The second pass,
you would then read back from these
attachments and do some lighting
computation to get your final scene.
So just to clarify the pass.
I don't mean draws.
This is actually-- I've had
this question a couple of times,
so I'm going to clarify it here.
Traditionally,
we sort of think of it as the first pass,
you bind a whole set of textures,
and you render to those
textures as your output.
And then you would unbind them and
bind a whole new set of textures in
the second pass and sample from the
previous textures in that second pass.
That's kind of traditionally
what we mean by passes.
And I'm going to use that word a
little more in the presentation,
so I just wanted to make
that clarification now.
All right.
So this is how you might-- what the
CPU code setup for this might look like.
And it's pretty simple.
You would just declare the four
attachments that you're interested in,
and then attach them to the frame buffer.
And enable-- tell GL that you're going
to draw into those four attachments,
and then just draw.
[ Transcript missing ]
So, framebuffer fetch with
multiple render targets,
this is what's new in
iOS 7 and the A7 GPU.
Combining that together
gives you this ability to do
deferred rendering in one pass.
And what that means is now you
can actually sort of read and
write from the same attachments.
And of course you can read and write
from one and output to another.
You can read from one
and output to another.
That's one of the things that
makes this really powerful.
You're not limited to just kind
of reading back from the same one.
This is how you might do
deferred rendering in one pass.
You would use MRTs to output your
four attachments for color normals,
that sort of thing.
Or in the same pass,
you would then read back using
framebuffer fetch without changing any
of the attachments that you have bound,
which is why I'm calling
it a single pass,
and then compute your
lighting and output.
to one of the attachments
that you have bound.
[ Transcript missing ]
You'll see that we've eliminated a
lot of the work that we were doing
on the CPU and moved that to the GPU.
And that's actually what we want.
And you can see that the
frame rate has gone up.
[ Transcript missing ]
All right,
so if we go back to the FPS tray,
we'll notice now, if you're using the A7
versus previous GPUs,
that you'll get this program
performance graph down below
after you've made a capture.
And you can see right off the
bat which programs are using the
most amount of time in your game.
Which shaders, right?
So this particular shader,
program number 12,
is using 22.29 milliseconds of
the 24.5 milliseconds of the A7.
So this particular shader is using 22.29
milliseconds of the 24.5 milliseconds
of the 24.5 milliseconds of the A7.
So this particular shader is using 22.29
milliseconds of the 24.5 milliseconds
of the 24.5 milliseconds of the A7.
will actually get line-by-line
performance information in the shader.
And you'll see how much performance,
how much time each one of
those lines of code are taking.
So, okay, great.
Well, this first line,
where I'm using instance ID to
look up in a uniform buffer object,
is taking 28.1% of the overall
20.52 milliseconds in my code.
Well, I actually,
that's work I want to be doing,
so that's fine.
I want to actually put more of that,
I want more of the percentage to
go into that particular line of
code than some of the other ones,
right?
So, okay, let's take a look and see
what else we can optimize.
Well, you know, this line,
this for loop here is
taking 11.3% to what?
Well, hard code a bunch of values
into a model view matrix,
and it looks like four times.
Well, you can take a look at the,
if we take a look at the shader best
practices guide on developer.apple.com,
you'll see that actually using a for
loop to pre-calculate a value to then,
you know, kind of set that up is kind of,
it's slow.
So something we can do actually
is just unroll this loop
and hard code these values.
So I'm going to go ahead and copy this
line of code and delete the for loop.
I'm going to go ahead
and unroll this loop.
and just paste the values here.
And then,
when I've made the change to my shader,
I can then click on this kind of circular
arrow here right below the shader,
and it will actually recompile -- ah,
it looks like I have an error.
So it's smart enough to tell
me that I have an error.
Okay.
Yes, because I changed the wrong --
Let's go back and do that again.
All right.
So I'll go ahead and recompile it again.
And we'll notice that
when it's done compiling,
that amount of work that we were
doing there is gone and it's moved,
and the percentage that we're --
where we want to be doing more work,
and that's where we're spending our time.
And of course, the overall time of the
shader has decreased.
It's now running at
You know, 17.56 milliseconds,
where it was, you know,
something like 20 milliseconds before.
Well, that's great.
Well, what if I want to actually see
that in my game and see what the
performance looks like in my game?
Well, if you click this arrow down here,
where the camera button was, you can get,
you know, this arrow.
It will continue--it will rerun
the game that you were running,
but it will inject the
new shader in your game.
And you can see that the
frame rate has gone up.
So that's one way you can use the
new shader profiler to actually
kind of tune your shaders.
And once again,
this only works on the A7.
So this is another reason to get one
of these devices and play with it.
And, you know,
you can optimize code for previous
devices as well using this,
but you have to have the A7 to
do this kind of shader profiling.
So I highly encourage you guys to
take advantage of the tools and
play around with some of this stuff.
We talked about the A7 GPU and
OpenGL ES 3.0 and how you can use
the new technologies together.
And we talked about how you can use
Xcode's OpenGL ES frame debugger
and the new shader profiler to
take advantage of how you can
tune your games with this stuff.
So I hope you guys take advantage
of this new technology and go out
and make some awesome OpenGL games.
And thank you for your time.
I'm Philip Iliasqueux.
I'm the new graphics
and media evangelist.
Just started in November on this team.
And Apple Developer Forums is, you know,
you can post any questions there,
and we'll try to get back to you as
much as you can -- as much as we can.
And take a look at the
documentation for OpenGL.
And this is the video I promised
to give you the link for earlier,
migrating to the OpenGL core profile.
And I'll help you get into
GLSL 300 by looking at how
we did that on the desktop.
So here's the link.
You should write it
down if you -- you know,
if you're interested in
taking a look at that.
So, great.
Thank you very much.